
--- START OF PAGE 1 ---

Open Journal of Social Sciences, 2021, 9, 498-506
Scientific
https://www.scirp.org/journal/jss
Research
ISSN Online: 2327-5960
<b>Publishing</b>
ISSN Print: 2327-5952
<b>Face Recognition in Law Enforcement:</b>
A Comparative Analysis of China
and the United States
Lulu Wang
School of Social and Political Science, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Email: l.wang-122@sms.ed.ac.uk
<b>Abstract</b>
How to cite this paper: Wang, L. L.
(2021). Face Recognition in Law Enforce-
The use of facial recognition is becoming increasingly widespread in China,
ment: A Comparative Analysis of China
and the United States. Open Journal of
with mobile phones, banks, police stations and so on. Facial recognition has
Social Sciences, 9, 498-506.
brought a certain benefit to social life in China, but in some areas of the
https://doi.org/10.4236/jss.2021.910036
United States facial recognition is prohibited. Facial recognition. This article
discusses the use of face recognition in national law enforcement and com-
Received: September 28, 2021
Accepted: October 26, 2021
pares commercial applications with those in China and the United States.
Published: October 29, 2021
Through comparison, we can understand the influence of face recognition in
a different environment and the different effects of different application
forms. The macro interaction between technology, the state and business
shapes the social construction, and at a micro level everyone in society needs
to be informed and aware of the costs and risks of using face recognition. In-
creased individual self-awareness helps to counteract the potential technolo-
gical cage.
<b>Keywords</b>
Face Recognition, Chins, the United States, Comparison
1. Introduction
I noticed that my grandmother's new neighbourhood had installed a face recog-
nition system at the door. The face recognition system is used to access the resi-
dential area's access control, which is used to determine whether the person en-
tering the residential area is a resident of the residential area. If so, the door will
automatically open, if not, people need to explain to the community security to
come here and register personal information before entering. So I randomly
asked eight of my grandmother's neighbours if they had any ideas about instal-
<b>Open Journal of Social Sciences</b>
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036 Oct. 29, 2021
498

--- END OF PAGE 1 ---

--- START OF PAGE 2 ---

L. L. Wang
ling a face recognition system at the entrance to the neighbourhood to control
access. Their point of view has the following two aspects: 1) convenient, the
household direct brush face speed can quickly enter the community. 2) Security,
facial recognition in access control applications can control who enters the
community, can prevent people who are not residents of the community.
The city that my grandmother lives in belongs to the 4th and 5th line of China.
Face recognition can be used to access residential area in the 4th and 5th line of
cities, reflecting something and an inevitable trend. Of course, the range of ap-
plication of face recognition system is extensive; the combination of face recog-
nition and access control is only one of the applications of face recognition. Fa-
cial recognition can also be used as account login, timecard, search for missing
persons, etc.
So what exactly does facial recognition give us? How do we view the impact of
face recognition systems? According to the use of the main body of face recogni-
tion, face recognition is used by the state and enterprises, respectively. The state
adopts facial recognition as a governance method for law enforcement depart-
ments, such as Shoplifting, suspect tracking and investigation (Zhao et al., 2003).
Alternatively, enterprises can develop the technology as a commercial product,
such as WeChat payment, Amazon Recognition, etc. The public debate over the
reaction to facial recognition systems has focused on privacy (Steinacker et al.,
2020), public acceptance and discrimination.
This paper discusses the use of face recognition in national law enforcement
and compares commercial applications with those in China and the United
States.
Why choose China and the US for comparison?
First, through comparison, we can understand the influence of face recogni-
tion in a different environment and the different effects of different application
forms. Second, both countries lead the world in the number of cameras used.
The United States ranks first in the number of cameras per 100 people, while
China ranks second<sup>1</sup>. The last, these two countries have different forms of state
organisation. China and the United States are one of the One-Party Socialist
Republic and the Federal Parliamentary Republic respectively and represent
these two different political categories.
2. Facial Recognition and Law Enforcement
Facial recognition is a technology that can detect and measure facial features
quickly and accurately (Liu, Yan, & Hu, 2021). Whether in China or the United
States, or European countries, law enforcement agencies or governments will use
biometric collection to monitor the public. Matching biological information
with individuals improves the efficiency of law enforcement departments in
searching for individuals, and this efficiency improvement can be applied to
searching for suspects, quickly getting information and contact of individuals, to
<sup>1</sup>The websites address of the rank is
<math display="block">\underline{https://www.precisesecurity.com/articles/Top-10-Countries-by-Number-of-CCTV-Cameras.}</math>
<b>Open Journal of Social Sciences</b>
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
499

--- END OF PAGE 2 ---

--- START OF PAGE 3 ---

L. L. Wang
obtain more clues efficiently.
The main features of face recognition can be summarised as identity verifica-
tion and monitoring (Xing, 2020). With The increasing importance of surveil-
lance-related applications (Zhao et al., 2003), surveillance in face recognition has
become more common. There are two main topics between face recognition and
law enforcement. One is that face recognition is used by law enforcement. The
combination of the two has a corresponding impact on the public all over the
world. The second is that the legal integrity of face recognition, both private and
public, lags behind the complete adoption and innovation of the technology
(Steinacker et al., 2020).
Xiao noted that China's use of the Internet and artificial intelligence technol-
ogy has increased government surveillance of the public, leading to a shift to-
ward digital centralization./n/nPublic Freedoms are limited by the state's access
to big data, and the collection of facial information by law enforcement agencies
across the country is part of that monitoring (Xiao, 2019). Some scholars also
argue that Chinese citizens do not have the exact self-protection mechanisms as
American citizens, namely that the Chinese public cannot have their right to
privacy in public places and oppose unreasonable seizure and search (Lopez,
2020). The Chinese government's digital regulatory and other policies to en-
hance its surveillance of its citizens are the focus of international discussion. Will
the public's sense of privacy and freedom diminish under the supervision of the
state? Indeed, China has the most considerable acceptance of facial recognition
(Kostka, Steinacker, & Meckel, 2021). Moreover, Chinese responses are more
likely to be technology optimists concerned with the convenience technology
brings to their lives (Wang & Zhang, 2019).
The use of facial recognition in China and the United States has protected in-
dividuals' privacy for the public response. There has been a "First case of face
recognition"<sup>2</sup> in China [In October 2019, Guo Bing, an associate professor at the
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University in China, filed a lawsuit against the Hangzhou
Wildlife World Co., Ltd. over the company's forced face painting. The Fuyang
District People's Court in Hangzhou has officially accepted the case; the case
became the "First face recognition case" brought by Chinese consumers.], in
which a citizen has resisted being forced to input face information. In April
2020, Guo Bing, the plaintiff in China's first facial recognition case, received
compensation of 1038 yuan, and Hangzhou Wildlife World Co. Ltd deleted Guo
Bing's facial features and fingerprint identification information. San Francisco
was the first city in the United States and the world to ban facial recognition. In
May 2019, the Board of Supervisors of San Francisco, the US state of California,
passed a Stop Secret Surveillance Ordinance. The decision bans the use of facial
recognition technology by all government departments in the city, including po-
<sup>2</sup>In October 2019, Guo Bing, an associate professor at the Zhejiang Sci-Tech University in China,
filed a lawsuit against the Hangzhou Wildlife World Co., Ltd. over the company's forced face paint-
ing. The Fuyang District People's Court in Hangzhou has officially accepted the case; the case be-
came the "First face recognition case" brought by Chinese consumer.
Open Journal of Social Sciences
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
500

--- END OF PAGE 3 ---

--- START OF PAGE 4 ---

L. L. Wang
lice stations.
Citizens in both countries disagree about face recognition, but the social
background of the disagreement is different. The relationship between the police
and the public and the social environment faced by ethnic minorities are differ-
ent in China and the United States. Hence, citizens view face recognition diffe-
rently in terms of discrimination and privacy. Due to the reports of police vi-
olence in the United States, the public may feel revolt against the police officers'
search for their information through face recognition, and the reduction of dis-
crimination in the social background of diverse nationalities and ethnic groups
is the reason for the widespread public resistance to face recognition in the
United States (Xing, 2020). China's focus on collective interests, and the public's
resistance to face recognition, is more personal than the civil disorder.
So, should states have access to personal information in face recognition?
The American public has resisted face recognition, but the public is more re-
ceptive to the use of facial recognition by the central government than private
companies, and so is China. The use of facial recognition for surveillance by law
enforcement is not a matter of public concern but rather the convenience and
increased security of face recognition applications (Kostka, Steinacker, & Meck-
el, 2021). Biometric features in face recognition are not lost, transmitted, or sto-
len. The use of biometric features requires a real user to access specific resources,
which improves security (Zhang & Kang, 2019).
The strengthening of state social monitoring can predict people's movements
and can quickly deal with social emergencies. For example, the new crown
pneumonia epidemic, for China, in a short time, the greatest efforts to mobilise
national resources, the use of digital organisation, the use of QR codes, face rec-
ognition to match personal information quickly, in order to organise the public's
work, isolation, treatment and other issues. Moreover, the combination of face
recognition and infrared temperature measurement technology can realize
"Non-contact temperature measurement", which is widely used in epidemic
prevention and control. Coupled with a shift in power from the highest levels of
the national government to grassroots collaboration, China quickly took the lead
in the spread of the epidemic.
In addition to the national grasp of personal biological characteristics for pub-
lic security, private enterprises' collection of face information can play a more
commercial value. The intervention of state forces can organise the collection of
face information and the wide range of applications with the highest efficiency.
Compared with private enterprises, it also has a more potent authority.
Whether it is the United States or China, facial recognition is to a certain ex-
tent the lack of explicit use standards. Continuing improvements in facial recog-
nition applications in China, the United States and other countries include es-
tablishing and improving safety and accountability thresholds for face recogni-
tion technology use, distinguishing between public and private sector spaces for
face recognition and different focuses for public and private use. Simultaneously,
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
Open Journal of Social Sciences
501

--- END OF PAGE 4 ---

--- START OF PAGE 5 ---

L. L. Wang
the collection of face information is more powerful than the collection of general
personal information. The improvement of the system can also improve the se-
curity of technology application and the protection of public rights.
3. Face Recognition and Commercial Applications
The widespread use of face recognition includes the demands of government
departments for public safety, commercial organisations for efficiency and cost
reduction, and artificial intelligence technology companies for business growth.
Some reporters pointed out that after the big companies open-source some algo-
rithms, the threshold of face recognition technology has been dramatically re-
duced. Many companies with modest technological capabilities have acquired
the ability to use face recognition. Still, the collection and storage of facial data
can not guarantee a certain degree of security. These companies often collect and
store basic facial information directly, ignoring security concerns.
At the beginning of the article, I mentioned that my grandmother's neigh-
bourhood had a facial recognition system for entry. How to store and use the
face photos of residents after collection and whether there will be information
security problems deserve our attention. The neighbourhood developers and the
property owners how to keep the collected personal information confidential
and manage also need clear instructions. In addition to the need to maintain
public safety, face recognition technology often makes face data obtained by or-
ganisations or systems without any qualifications or even forced to use. As a re-
sult, the criminal problems exposed by the misuse of face data are likely to out-
weigh the need for public safety.
The relationship between business companies and the government is also dif-
ferent in China and the United States. There are different criteria between busi-
ness companies and the government on whether facial recognition should be
used. Public Safety Protection seems to be a criterion to consider when using
face recognition.
The databases in the United States are not interconnected, and government
enforcement will require data from large companies in partnership with many
technology companies. For example, in June 2020, Amazon banned police from
using its widely used facial recognition software, rekognition, and Microsoft, un-
til the country perfected its legal system. In contrast to China, the information
obtained by the service providers belongs to China. In addition to commercial
use, the content of the service providers platforms also needs to be managed by
the state, and the international export of data also needs to be agreed upon and
managed by the state (Xiao, 2019).
In China, the state holds the majority of the biometric information gained
through face recognition. The facial recognition technology of the service pro-
viders comes from the popularity of technology companies and national tech-
nology rather than the uniqueness of the technology. Service providers in the
United States have the advantage of patenting their technology and self-control
Open Journal of Social Sciences
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
502

--- END OF PAGE 5 ---

--- START OF PAGE 6 ---

L. L. Wang
of their technology and database, forming a mode of dialogue with the govern-
ment and restricting the use of the US government to some extent. So, China can
carry out international protection of data from the national level, limiting the
information leakage caused by data sharing of international cooperation be-
tween commercial companies to some extent. However, to a certain extent, it
will also restrict the autonomy of enterprises. The power of the United States has
been decentralised under mutual constraints, which can better provide the social
subjects of the pursuit of rights channels and maximise the strength of different
subjects.
It seems that, under the influence of face recognition, different relationships
between different countries and commercial companies are diverging in the
world. Moreover, commercial companies' possible disclosure of personal privacy
is also a common problem faced by China and the United States. Therefore, the
regulations on facial recognition of commercial products need further standar-
dise the use range and standards of face recognition.
In addition, different countries and commercial companies in the face recog-
nition and other artificial intelligence technology, the impact of social structure,
we also need to think about how. The long-term leadership of the state over fa-
cial recognition and its data in commercial companies, and the partnership be-
tween the state and commercial companies in facial recognition projects, will
bring about changes in society over the long term and a power shift. The appli-
cation of face recognition in different countries also reflects the interaction be-
tween technology, government and enterprise.
4. The Cultivation of Rational Individuals
After the text edit has been completed, the paper is ready for the template. Dup-
licate the template file by using the Save As command, and use the naming con-
vention prescribed by your journal for the name of your paper. In this newly
created file, highlight all of the contents and import your prepared text file. You
are now ready to style your paper.
The combination of artificial intelligence, such as face recognition, law en-
forcement and supervision, can be seen as a way to reshape the government's
power. But whether in the United States or China, the public is responding in
different ways to questions about the privacy and freedom of facial recognition.
For example, San Francisco in the United States first banned the use of face rec-
ognition. China has also emerged "Face recognition of the first case," a legal way
to oppose the admission of visitors to the scenic zoo spot mandatory facial in-
formation.
Intense state supervision or law enforcement cannot prevent conflict between
the law enforcement departments and the privacy issues involved in face recog-
nition. Both China and the United States are making efforts to perfect the legal
system of face recognition. With the improvement of education, the deepening
of global rational thinking, and the strengthening of individual self-consciousness,
Open Journal of Social Sciences
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
503

--- END OF PAGE 6 ---

--- START OF PAGE 7 ---

L. L. Wang
the public's consciousness is also promoting the policy change and response of
the state power organisation.
We should pay attention to the range of use of facial recognition, legal norms
and the differences between countries. We should also be aware that artificial
intelligence such as face recognition is reshaping the way society regulates and
the scope of individual privacy. Furthermore, as a means of technological
change, artificial intelligence has brought about changes in lifestyle and changes
in the economy, productivity, and social structure (Li, 2020).
The intelligence degree of human society is constantly deepening, and the
technical foundation of artificial intelligence embedded in our society is also
constantly being consolidated. Increased security from technology also seems to
increase public acceptance of technologies such as face recognition (Kostka,
Steinacker, & Meckel, 2021). The improvement of the degree of acceptance, the
convenience of technology, the ease of bringing people to the pursuit of tech-
nology and optimistic use, and ignoring its hidden dangers. The Center for
Science and technology research at Tsinghua University points out that people's
attitudes toward artificial intelligence are becoming more rational. People have
gone from fanaticism to reflection on the potential pitfalls of artificial intelligence.
According to this article, the improvement of digital social regulation in Chi-
na does not represent the road to digital centralisation, nor can it be regarded as
unique to China. In addition to the problems that facial recognition technology
brings in different fields. It is more important to judge whether a series of
changes are brought about by the new technology form or the transformation of
the existing problems in society, or the amplification and presentation of preju-
dice. The Chinese government uses technologies such as face recognition for so-
cial supervision, showing that the power is in the hands of the government and
human beings. On the other hand, when the US government uses technologies
such as face recognition for social governance, technology is more instrumental.
We now belong to the artificial intelligence aided human dictatorship (Zhe,
2018). People are faced with how to play the technological advantages, maintain
human independence, and the technical risk pre-investigation and solution.
Researchers in the digital age need to think about how to face and defuse
technological risks so that artificial intelligence can genuinely become good
technology, which requires both development and governance and promotion
and limitation (Li, 2020). China and the United States use face recognition in
different ways. The operation mode of social supervision can be used for refer-
ence by each other. However, the political, social and technical reasons behind
the face recognition information need to be explored and analysed; it makes the
world more rational to use face recognition.
But when the use of technology beyond human control, the power of tech-
nology will be greater than human control, that is, artificial intelligence free
from human supervision, into the stage of autonomous evolution (Wang, 2001),
coping with technological autonomy is a global topic. So individual conscious-
Open Journal of Social Sciences
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
504

--- END OF PAGE 7 ---

--- START OF PAGE 8 ---

L. L. Wang
ness should be in line with the topic of the times. The enhancement of individual
rational thinking can promote different countries and the world to understand
technology and the promotion society more perfect system and a series of social
topic development.
In the use of face recognition, many scholars study the public acceptance and
investigate the factors that influence the public perception of face recognition.
The education level is not always significant. The correlation between public
education and acceptance is still worth exploring. The increase in individual
education plays a vital role in an individual's judgment of his or her environ-
ment and understanding of the risks. The general audience should be aware of
the cost and risk in the process of using face recognition. When the individual's
rational consciousness is improved, it can complement the national supervision,
and the individual has an independent judgment for the national supervision.
The role of state supervision is not only to predict the behaviour of citizens but
also to protect the collective of people with different levels of education.
5. Conclusion
In the application of face recognition in China and the United States, there are
public responses based on the protection of individual privacy. Citizens of the
two countries have different opinions on face recognition. However, the social
background is diverse, so the citizens emphasise the discrimination and privacy
of face recognition. While analysing the problems that face recognition technol-
ogy may bring, it is more important to judge whether a series of changes result
from new technological forms or the amplification and transformation of pre-
conceptions that already exist in society.
China and the United States have different relationships with commercial fa-
cial recognition programs. China has long been a leader in face recognition and
its data. The United States has a partnership with commercial facial recognition
programs. The application of face recognition in different countries also reflects
the interaction between technology, government and enterprise.
The macro interactions between technology, state and business shape the
structure of society, and each individual in society at the micro-level needs to
understand and be aware of the costs and risks involved in using face recogni-
tion. An increase in personal self-awareness helps to counter the potential tech-
nological cage.
<b>Conflicts of Interest</b>
The author declares no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this
paper.
References
He, Z. (2018). Will Artificial Intelligence Form a New Autocracy?: History and Future of
Human Politics. Journal of Party School of CPC Tianjin Municipal Committee, 6, 3-10.
<b>Open Journal of Social Sciences</b>
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
505

--- END OF PAGE 8 ---

--- START OF PAGE 9 ---

L. L. Wang
Kostka, G., Steinacker, L., & Meckel, M. (2021). Between Security and Convenience: Fa-
cial Recognition Technology in the Eyes of Citizens in China, Germany, the United
Kingdom, and the United States. Public Understanding of Science (Bristol, England),
30, 671-690. https://doi.org/10.1177/09636625211001555
Li, H. (2020). Sociological Considerations Caused by the Fusion of Digital Humanism
and Artificial Intelligence. Internet World, 11, 18-23.
Liu, Y., Yan, W., & Hu, B. (2021). Resistance to Facial Recognition Payment in China:
The Influence of Privacy-Related Factors. Telecommunications Policy, 45.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2021.102155
Lopez, A. E. (2020). The Use of Facial Recognition Technology by the United States and
China, and How It Affects Civil Liberties. ProQuest Dissertations Publishing.
Steinacker, L., Meckel, M., Kostka, G., & Borth, D. (2020). Facial Recognition: A
Cross-National Survey on Public Acceptance, Privacy, and Discrimination.
Wang, D. L. (2001). Unsupervised Learning: Foundations of Neural Computation: A Re-
view. The AI Magazine, 22, 101.
Wang, Z., & Zhang, L. (2019). Security, Privacy and Civil Liberties: Reflections on the
Technical Security of Facial Recognition Systems in Public Places. Journal of Party
School of Shengli Oilfield, 32, 74-76.
https://doi.org/10.13600/j.cnki.jpsslof.issn.1009-4326.2019.01.016
Xiao, Q. (2019). The Road to Digital Unfreedom: President Xi's Surveillance State. Jour-
nal of Democracy, 30, 53-67. https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2019.0004
Xing, H. Q. (2020). Legal Regulation of Face Recognition. Comparative Study Method, 5,
51-63.
Zhang, W. K., & Kang, M. J. (2019). Factors Affecting the Use of Facial-Recognition
Payment: An Example of Chinese Consumers. IEEE Access, 7, 154360-154374.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2927705
Zhao, W., Chellappa, R., Phillips, P., & Rosenfeld, A. (2003). Face Recognition: A Litera-
ture Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 35, 399-458.
https://doi.org/10.1145/954339.954342
DOI: 10.4236/jss.2021.910036
Open Journal of Social Sciences
506

--- END OF PAGE 9 ---
